Uniparental inheritance of mitochondria enables organisms to avoid the 
costs of intracellular competition among potentially selfish organelles. 
However, by preventing recombination, uniparental inheritance also impedes 
the expression of advantageous mutations. We hypothesized that at least 
some of the beneficial mutations in mitochondrial DNA would be more likely 
to become fixed if they arose from a sexual event rather than an 
uniparental one. To test this hypothesis we selected for a mutation in the 
gene encoding an enzyme involved in energy metabolismâ€”a change that had 
already been shown to improve performance in fruit flies and mice. The 
mutant fruit fly is able to use glucose as its sole source of fuel and has 
higher levels of a fatty acid called butyrate, which protects against 
colon cancer.
We hypothesized that the resulting fruit fly would have a reduced capacity 
to survive on glucose alone and would therefore need additional fat in its 
diet. In fact, it did: the mutant was unable to live solely on glucose. 
Further experiments showed that the fat-loving mutant also benefited from 
higher amounts of another metabolite produced by gut bacteria, acetate. A 
study of metabolic pathways suggested that this acetate-producing pathway 
is activated when the cells are starved of glucose; for example, during 
periods of prolonged fasting or starvation after the death of a parent, or 
during hibernation. If so, then the increased acetate production probably 
helped the mutant fruit fly to survive longer periods without food. Thus, 
we expected the mutant fruit fly to have a greater capacity to survive in 
times of famine and other stress.
