By introducing novel capacities and functions, new genes and gene families 
may play a crucial role in ecological transitions. Mechanisms generating 
new gene families include de novo gene birth, horizontal gene transfer, 
and neofunctionalization following a duplication event. In each case, the 
gene family is not just a collection of genes but an assembly that has 
been modified to perform a novel function. These processes are all 
examples of how evolution can create new genetic information without 
increasing genome size.
The discovery of adaptive properties for genes previously considered inert 
highlights the importance of considering both the structure and dynamics 
of functional genomics when studying genomic change over evolutionary time 
scales. For example, a gene might be highly conserved across species but 
have little or no known physiological activity. Genes with similar 
structures could be functionally unrelated. Conversely, a gene that is 
highly expressed in one organism may be silenced in another. In either 
case, these patterns of expression would suggest the presence of different 
physiological functions. Some of these differences will reflect the degree 
to which genes are horizontally transferred between organisms; others will 
result from the accumulation of subtle changes within a given gene's 
structure. The identification of such structural adaptations requires more 
than simply comparing sequences against other closely related genes (such 
comparisons are useful as an initial screening step). Instead, researchers 
should consider the broader context of the entire genome and the resulting 
system of regulatory networks.
